##Blog Post 1

###What do you think being a data scientist is about?  What do you see as the major duties and/or knowledge areas?  What differences/similarities do you see between data scientists and statisticians?  How do you view yourself in relation to these two areas?

Data science is a career that unifies a variety of disciplines. While the job entails qualities of typical data analytics, machine learning, computer science, software engineering, and statistics, in my eyes the fundamental difference of a data scientist’s position is specialized based on a particular industry.   The concept of using “sentiment analysis to extract critical information from the collected data sets” is what sets data scientists apart from the rest (Sasikumar). 

I believe the Open Data Science Conference Journal said it perfectly when they stated “a data scientist is someone who is better at statistics than any software engineer and better at software engineering than any statistician.” While both data scientists and statisticians conduct analysis and visualization, in addition data scientists handle data processing methodology. The knowledge of programming seems to be a key difference between the two. Data scientists must be able to understand and perform statistics while also do much more.  Instead of working to “improve a single, simple model to best fit the data” like a statistician, data scientists compare multiple machine learning algorithms and models to predict accuracy and select best model (ODSCJournal). Therefore data science is a form of applied statistics, typically with a much larger scale of data to absorb, cleanse, and transform. “The types of problems studied, the academic background of the people in the field, and the terminology used” also differ between the two fields (ODSCJournal). 

If I am to be honest, I have been questioning the choices I made for my graduate program as of late.  As a recovering social science teacher, my heart lies in the humanities which is why I chose to pursue my Masters in International Studies.  Since quantitative and geospatial analysis are important research areas in social science, I chose to also work toward graduate certificates in both GIS and Applied Statistics and Data Management.   To my dismay, the local job market has not been promising in my last semester and I have been quite worried about the seemingly dried up well of career prospects. However, after reading these articles I feel much more at ease with my choices in my graduate program.  As the Mixpanel article states, “Today’s data scientists are an eclectic mix … Oddballs who by some series of events and education happen to be both skilled engineers and number crunchers.” I feel as though I may just be one of those oddballs who, given the right opportunity, has just the right knowledge in data analytics, machine learning, statistics, and domain knowledge in the humanities to make it as a data scientist. 
