# Project 1 Reflection

This project used R Markdown to examine and visualize data on public school enrollment in the United States from the 1970's to the early 2000's. Acquired from the U.S. Census Bureau, the data includes enrollment data on national, state, and county level. Using the `readr` and `tidyverse` packages, I manipulated the original data sets by creating variables and functions to reshape, modify, and plot the data. Applying all the methods learned in the first three weeks of lectures and assignments from ST 558: Data Science for Statisticians at North Carolina State University, Project 1 helped me to become more confident in my basic programming skills.  I effectively reshaped the data from wide to long format, changed the data type of variables from character to numeric, modified observation values or strings, created new objects, variables and functions, call those custom functions, plot aspects of data based on user specifications, and create an easily readable, understandable html output for users. One of the best skills I gained was being able to successfully troubleshoot my own code to correct programming errors.

Although the project was much more difficult and lengthy than I had originally expected, I liked that the project instructions were designed to run through each data processing step before writing the functions to execute said steps.  The tactic I chose to take when coding the custom functions was to first get them to run without the user input options to ensure I was getting an accurate output. I was able to use my outputs from the first section to evaluate the functions’ accuracy.  This approach worked well for me, and is a technique I will continue to utilize in the future.

There were many lessons (learned the hard way) during the completion of this project.  The most significant lesson learned was in the writing of the plot function.  Throughout my programming, I successfully used the temporary variable `x` for the enrollment statistic when writing the custom functions.  Since the previous functions did not yield any error messages when called, I chose `x` as the temporary variable `x` for the enrollment statistic within my custom plot function as well.  When using the default arguments, my plot functions produced the correct line graphs, but resulted in an error message when specifying a user-defined name for the enrollment statistic.  This was particularly confusing with the class function for county since I had three other input arguments for state, grouping and number, all of which ran without error when changed by the user.  After hours of troubleshooting, I attempted to call the function without the `x =` but still included the user specification in quotes.  The plot functions finally ran without error.  This change made me realize my issue must be my temporary `x` variable.  The `plot()` function in particular has `x` and `y` arguments reserved for the coordinate points in the plot, so my temporary `x` was confusing the function.  For consistency, I changed all my temporary variables for the enrollment statistic in every custom function.  To avoid this in the future, I will write my functions with more unique input arguments.  

Nearing the end of the project, I found a smaller issue with my combine function.  In the final section with four new data sets, the first two times my custom combine function ran, it correctly merged the data sets.  However, when trying to combine the results from the first two functions, it failed, producing an empty tibble. When writing my combine function, I had originally assigned the resulting tibbles new names.  Since the function requires a particular variable name, I needed to assign the new tibbles the same name as before.  To avoid this error in the future, I will write my functions with consistent variables instead of altering them.  

Overall, this was a difficult project, but its execution provided many teachable moments that will continue to benefit my programming skills.  There is certainly nothing more satisfying than knitting the final output and feeling the immense sense of accomplishment and pride in one's own work.

Here is a link to my [final html output for Project 1](https://mmkahn.github.io/project1.html) for your review.
