# Blog Post 5

**What things are you going to do differently in practice now that you've had this course? Data science (and statistics) is a huge field. What do you hope to do in relation to data science (and statistics) in your future career? What aspects/areas do you want to learn more about?**

As a graduate student in the Master of International Studies program, I will most likely be using data science to supplement my humanities research – managing data and finding trends to increase complexity and understanding. EDA and visualization of data learned in this course will undoubtably be cornerstones of my future projects. With this visual piece in mind, the ability to create graphs, matrices, shiny apps and interactive dashboards is going to be very useful in my future career.  

I will also continue to use Git, GitBash, and GitHub.  I particularly learned the importance of using the GitHub repository when my computer experienced a Windows OS failure the morning an assignment was due.  All my previous work, including R and RStudio itself, were lost.  It was then that I truly understood the power of GitHub. It is more than just a way for multiple people to commit changes to the same project at the same time - it’s a place to consistently and safely store your work. It was not a fun lesson to learn, but it was a necessary one.  In the future, especially when pertaining to work projects, I will utilize GitHub as a way to save my workflow and progress.  Also, after being introduced to it in our course, my preferred terminal is GitBash over Command Prompt or PowerShell.

While I admittedly still struggle to create my own functions in a timely manner, the emphasis this course placed on user-defined functions has proven their practicality.  Creating these user-defined functions are always versatile and streamline workflow and results.  Another large take-away from this course is the simplistic power of the `caret` package. When it comes to training, cross-validation, tuning, and prediction; there is no better package in R. Its flexibility changed the way I approached model fitting, particularly coding with functions such as `train()`, `predict()`, `postResample()` and `confusionMatrix()`.

Again, since I will primarily be using data science to bring deeper understanding and complexity to my study of the humanities, I would love to continue learning more about visualization techniques in R such as using `shiny` apps and `ggplot2`. In addition to my MIS masters degree and graduate certificate in Applied Statistics and Data Management, I also have my graduate certificate in Geographic Information Systems (GIS).  With this background, I would like to learn more about the mapping functions in `ggplot2` such as `geom_polygon()`. Similarly, I should also explore other functions such as those in the `choroplethr` package for creating maps by various regions. These additions to my programming skills will only strengthen my research.
